At the moment, we will move on to the next topic of our course, namely, linear programming.
Let's start a little bit from afar. Imagine that you need to solve an equation, a solution that you
cannot imagine. Well, let's say that you forgot the math course, and you want to solve the equation,
for example, the form of cosine x is equal to sine x. The solution is quite simple, there are two angles, 45
plus 180 would be 225 degrees, or in terms of pi, it is pi by 4, and, accordingly, pi plus pi by 4. But let's say
that you forgot the math course and want to solve this equation. Can modern tools help you,
for example, the Excel program? Yes, they can. Excel has a function called parameter selection,
or in English goal seek. With its help, you can select one variable so that your equation is solved.
Goal seek or parameter selection allows you to solve almost all equations. Unfortunately,
this equation is only one variable, and there can be any degree, any complexity, but, alas,
as I said, only one variable. There are some subtleties when solving such problems, but nevertheless.
As an example, we will now see how to solve the equation sine x is equal to cosine x with the help of goal seek.
As I said, the solution of the simplest equations is possible in the search function. Let's try.
We have a simple equation sine x is equal to cosine x.
Well, of course, in order to solve it in Excel, you will need to write it a little differently.
Okay, so, we will call one of our cells x. We will set the value one there for now. We will call it x.
Well, as you can see, yes, that is, since we have a sine of one minus a cosine of one is equal to zero
Future
The solution helps choose the correct cell for performing the penultimate equation listing.
As you can see, XL is not 0, but it's 0.002.
It's almost 0.
If you want, you can change the accuracy and check the solution with a higher accuracy.
As we expected, the solution is approximately pi by 2.
Let's check it. I'll multiply this number by 4.
Sorry, not by 4, of course.
I'll multiply it by 4 and see what it is. Yes, 3, 3, 14.
It should be 1, 5, 9 in the real pi.
Now, if we set another initial value, for example, 5,
we will get a completely different solution for this equation.
Let's try.
Data, analysis, what if, parameter selection, set cell C5, value equal to 0, change value of cell C4.
OK.
As you can see, we got a different value.
And no matter what initial value we started with, or rather, not so,
since equations have many solutions, there are two pi periodic, or rather, pi periodic solutions,
then starting with different initial values, we will get different solutions.
OK.
Let's move on to more serious tasks, tasks of several variables.
OK, we've seen how simple equations are solved by parameter selection.
It's time to talk about more difficult tasks.
Of course, tasks in life are much more difficult, most often.
And another function of Excel will help us with this,
namely, it's called solution search, or solver in English.
In fact, a solver, or rather, solution search,
is a program that allows you to implement linear programming on Excel.
What is linear programming?
Linear programming is a search for an optimal solution
in a situation when your initial data is limited.
Limited not in the sense that you don't have enough data,
but in the sense that you impose a limit, for example,
you want to make the bathroom at home as big as possible,
but its depth should not be more than one meter.
This is an example of a typical limitation.
The previous function that we discussed, goal seek,
does not allow you to impose a limit.
In addition, it allows you to solve tasks with only one variable.
A solver allows you to work with functions of many variables.
Of course, we understand that, for example,
the value of the enterprise is always a function of many variables.
This is a function of, I don't know,
the cost, the cost of sale,
the number of sales in the nominal expression,
the function of our constant variables, variables, and so on.
A solver allows you to work with a large number of functions.
To be fair, I must say that not always and not everywhere,
but nevertheless, a solver is a much more advanced tool.
In addition, a solver allows two-dimensional and whole variables.
You can't sell 2.3 cars, for example.
You sell either two or three.
In this regard, to be honest,
whole variables in a solver work poorly,
but it's better than nothing.
After all, it's the only available,
in fact, really available,
solution to the linear programming problem.
In addition, a solver offers things like solution analysis.
We'll look at an example now,
but for now we can say that,
for example, such a task.
You perform, like the following task,
you produce a mixture of nuts,
and you run out of one of the types of nuts.
A person comes and asks,
I know you're out of such nuts,
for example, a hazelnut,
but do you want to take it,
but it's a half price more than you usually take.
And you need to understand whether it's beneficial or not.
Can you afford to buy this nut,
so that you stay within your cost,
so that your loss does not decrease,
so that you do not get into losses.
At the same time, a solver can be used,
what is interesting, can be used in macros.
If there is time, I can show you
how macros work in Excel.
And a solver allows you to use various search methods.
At the same time, what is the problem?
Solver, well, imagine,
I will show this with my hand,
imagine this function,
which has two minimums,
the main minimum and the second minimum,
smaller, on the contrary, larger.
Having entered the second small minimum,
which is not global,
but a local minimum,
a solver will not be able to get out of it,
because it does not search,
like a goose, it does not go through the variable,
it just looks for the derivative
and looks where it should go next.
If it gets into a hole,
it will never get out of this hole.
Well, accordingly,
since it cannot get out of it,
it needs help,
the initial value of the variables must be shifted
so that it is on the other side of the small hole.
We will talk in more detail about the type of limitation,
the existing type of limitation,
when we solve the problem,
but in principle there is a limitation on the budget.
This is when you are preparing,
for example, to spend money on the New Year,
and you think how much you have to buy,
and at the same time you understand
that your budget is limited to,
let's say, three or five thousand rubles.
There are limitations on non-negativity,
for example,
let's say you are a metallurgical company,
you produce alloys,
if you sell a negative amount of some alloy,
it means that you buy this alloy,
you disassemble it into components
and use it in others.
This is probably not very correct.
The limitation can be there at extreme risk,
and as I said,
there can be a limitation on the whole,
non-whole, and so on,
on the double, non-double, and so on.
Let's talk about using the solver right now.
Let's consider the following task.
You work, you own a company
that produces a mixture of nuts.
The nuts are called
nut-nut-plus-premium-lux,
and they consist of the corresponding number
of different types of nuts.
Here, in this line,
the number of nuts in the percentage
of the components of this mixture is indicated,
of course, in weight percentages.
If you look,
each line will be 100.
Check it, make sure of it,
so you don't doubt it.
The sum is 100.
The mixture is sold at different prices.
You have a certain number
of different types of nuts on the slot,
you have a purchase price,
and you want to maximize,
let's call it a profit.
It's not exactly a profit,
because you still have operational costs,
and so on.
But in this case, let's call it
an operational profit.
In short, we'll call it a profit.
Again, you buy peanuts for $2 per kilo of hazelnuts,
for $3, for Brazilian nuts for $2, and so on.
The most expensive nut is cedar,
the most expensive mixture is lux.
The number of nuts on the slot
is completely different.
What do we do next?
We will change the production
of our mixtures in this way.
Look, if I put another number here,
you will see how the number of nuts
used in the line changes.
For example, I put number 10 here,
and we have a change in the growth rate.
And we have a change in the growth rate
of peanuts, of course,
because we added 9 kilograms of nuts
to the production mixture.
Accordingly, 9 kilograms of new peanut
consumption gives us 4.2 additional.
And, for example, to demonstrate again,
I will add another 10 kilograms
of production in the lux mixture,
and we will expect that now we will not need
300 grams of nuts, as it was before,
but 2.3 kilograms of nuts.
So it is.
Now pay attention,
here in these three cells
our sales are calculated.
Sales are simply the sum of
the paired products,
the price of sales per production.
Here the function XL is used,
the sum of sales,
it has an English name.
Accordingly, our costs are also considered
as the sum of sales,
as the price per use of the corresponding
quantity of the corresponding nut.
And, of course, our profit is considered
as the difference between our sales
and our costs.
We want to use the function,
or rather the XL overhaul,
which is called the search for a solution.
In order to use it,
you need to install it first.
You should probably turn to your manual,
that is, to the reference system,
because in different versions
it happens in several different ways.
Most likely, if the overhaul is not installed,
and by default it is not installed,
you will need to resort to the help
of your distributive disk.
Okay, we want to use
the search for a solution.
What is the conclusion of this function?
It asks what target function we want to see.
First of all, we choose the target function
and the target profit.
As we agreed,
as it is known,
the purpose of any company
is to get its profits
by exploiting people.
We will maximize the profit
by changing the production.
We will have to impose certain restrictions
on the consumption of our nuts,
because we understand
that we cannot consume peanuts
more than 300 kg
and cedar nuts more than 100 kg.
These are so-called budget restrictions.
In addition,
we will now see
that we will need other restrictions.
We clicked the Execute button.
At the same time,
Excel gives us an optimal solution.
Okay, let's see what happened.
We have a negative value
in the production graph.
What does this mean?
From the point of view of Excel,
from the point of view of its implementation
of linear programming,
we can buy a peanut mixture,
disassemble it into component parts
and use it in practice.
We probably won't like it,
so I suggest adding another restriction.
It is clear that our production
should not be less than zero.
Let's run the search again.
You will see that the numbers of the new solution
will differ significantly.
We will add another restriction.
Click the Add button.
Link to cell.
Here you can use block links.
Not less than or equal to,
but more than or equal to zero.
Pay attention to the drop-down menu.
Less than or equal to,
more than or equal to,
whole or double.
It is best to use less than or equal to,
less than or equal to,
or more than or equal to.
Whole increases the size of the problem.
Excel will take much longer
to sort out its solution.
The sign is equal.
It is a very tough sign.
Excel will have a much harder time
solving the problem.
We will talk about how to solve it later.
For now, let's use the search function again.
As you can see,
Excel gave us a zero.
It won't change anything.
What happened?
We ran out of hazelnuts.
We ran out of cedar nuts.
It turned out that the margin
for the sale of the nut mix
Lux is quite high.
All the others.
We ran out of cedar nuts,
and at the same time we ran out of hazelnuts.
Since the hazelnut is a part of all the nuts,
we can't sell anything else.
Let's try to start with a few other initial conditions
to see what happens
if we had more hazelnuts.
Then we will come to the conclusion
that some other nut will run out.
The hazelnut should not be the first to run out.
Let's run the search again.
Sometimes it takes some time.
Pay attention.
Now not all sales are related to cedar nuts.
As you can see, cedar nuts are used completely.
This is normal.
Pecan is used completely.
Then the following task arises.
Imagine that you are in a situation
when you run out of pecan,
and you run out of cedar nuts.
Someone comes to you
and offers to buy 200 kg of pecan,
but not for $ 4 per kg,
but for $ 8 per kg.
Yes, the price is higher than your usual price,
but on the other hand,
while you have no pecan,
if you can't get it anywhere on the market,
you can't produce any more nuts.
How to solve this problem?
Is it worth buying twice as much?
It turns out that Excel gives us this answer.
Let's run the search again.
And we will ask Excel
to choose stability as a type of report.
Pay attention.
I don't know why Microsoft chose the name
for this graph,
but the name is much more intuitive.
It is Shadow Price.
Before such a price,
you should be ready to pay
for 1 kg of pecan,
and then you can buy
a corresponding nut
at this price.
This number shows
the point where you will work at zero
by buying a corresponding nut
at this price.
You saw how Solr works.
It is a search engine.
As I promised,
we will talk about
how to use the restrictions
that we can impose
when solving our tasks.
The best restrictions are
the non-strict restrictions
on the top and bottom,
that is, less or equal.
The restrictions of the type equal
to the number of nuts.
Solver is not a strict tool.
Try to give it a chance
to oscillate
within the range
of 1.1 to 50 kg.
This is a good solution.
Solver is not a strict tool.
Try to give it a chance
to oscillate
within the range
of 1.1 to 50 kg.
Solver will not experience
significant jumps
and will work much more stable.
It will take much less time
and its solution will be much more
accurate and much more acceptable for you.
What does the solution
of the task in space look like?
Imagine that you have only two nuts.
In space, it looks like this.
You have one axis, that is, one nut,
the second axis, that is, another nut,
and a certain plane
that is your profit.
It depends on how much you spend.
One axis is one nut,
the other is another nut.
The plane in space is your profit.
The limitations that we impose
in space cut off certain parts
of our solution plane.
Our plane is a part of the solution
that we are trying to solve.
The solution is not a part of the solution.
Accordingly, our plane
from an infinite plane
turns into a limited figure.
If we start maximizing the function,
it can take maximum value
only at the point
where several solutions converge,
or at the edge, and so on.
In space, it looks like a limited figure
with several possible sides.
It is difficult to imagine
more than in three-dimensional space.
Therefore, it is quite possible
to imagine it in three-dimensional space.
Try to do it.
What else is necessary to talk about?
Solver.
Of course, everything works better
with a solver, but it does not mean
that it cannot be used for nonlinear solutions.
However, as I said,
it can find a local minimum
or a local maximum,
not finding a global minimum or maximum.
The only way to deal with this
is to move to solutions from different sides,
that is, from different starting points.
Unfortunately, in this case,
there is only one possible option.
As for the fairness of the solution,
if we do not talk about the possibility
of locking the solver in one of the existing minimums,
then the solver solution is quite good.
Nevertheless, if you have a lot of variables,
try to get it out of balance.
It is necessary to apply the solver
many times already on the finished solution.
Try to get it out of balance,
changing the initial conditions a little bit
or maybe even quite strongly.
Okay, now we have talked
about linear programming.
According to the existing tradition,
I will give you two simple tasks.
The first of them is to find a solution
and the second is to solve it.
The first of them is similar to logistics.
Both of them can be used
to implement a general operating principle.
Imagine a situation.
Four people are standing
in front of a narrow bridge across the river at night.
One of them is fast enough
and can cross the bridge in one minute,
while the other is old enough
and can't stand the weight of more than two people.
Besides, there is no rail on the bridge,
so it is impossible to walk on it at night.
There is a flashlight, but it is only one.
Someone has to give it to someone.
Unfortunately, they cannot throw it away,
because they risk to drop it.
The task is to move all the people
who have approached the bridge to the other side of the river.
As a hint, as I said,
when solving this task,
you need to use a general operating principle.
This was the first hint.
If you don't want to wait for the second hint,
stop the lecture now.
The second hint will be a little later.
The second hint.
The solution is at the end of the lecture.
Another task.
It is called camel logistics.
The task is this.
There is a banana plantation on one edge of the desert,
a thousand kilometers wide, and a store on the other.
The crop of bananas this year was 3,000 pieces.
We have one single vehicle, namely a camel.
It is a modern camel with a self-loading and self-unloading device,
a cruise stability system, GPS navigation, and so on.
The camel's load is 1,000 bananas.
But in order for the camel not to starve,
it must eat one banana per kilometer.
It doesn't matter if it carries 1,000 bananas,
20 bananas, or nothing at all.
It must eat anyway.
The task is this.
What is the maximum number of bananas
that a camel can carry from a plantation to a store?
Once again.
The width of the desert is 1,000 kilometers.
The load is 1,000 bananas.
It eats one banana per kilometer.
What is the maximum number of bananas
that a camel can carry from a plantation to a store?
And the hint that was mentioned in the previous task.
When solving this task,
we have to consider the following.
We have discussed statistics,
we have discussed linear programming.
Linear programming assumes
that you are in the deterministic world.
When we were solving the task about nuts,
we secretly assumed
that all the nut mixtures
that we produce will be bought from us.
And at the prices that we set.
But are we always so sure?
Of course, not always.
In fact, it is unlikely that a person
can be so seriously sure.
Unless we are talking about abstract mathematics.
Imagine this situation.
You are a boy who sells newspapers.
You buy newspapers from the editorial office for $1
and sell them for $2.
If you fail to sell all the newspapers,
the editorial office is so kind to you
that they take these newspapers for 50 cents each.
You are a smart boy
and you have managed to calculate
that the average demand for your newspapers
is 100 pieces of cloth per day.
But this is the average demand.
And the standard deviation is, let's say,
20 newspapers.
Under the conditions of this task,
what should be the optimal order?
As usual, we optimize the profit.
It should be less than 100,
exactly 100, more than 100.
And if it is more than 100 or less than 100,
then it should be more or less.
And here a certain probability is involved,
a certain uncertainty.
Uncertainty is a broader concept than probability,
as we have already noted.
Nevertheless, we will consider
that in this case we are dealing
not with uncertainty as such,
but with its part, probability.
To solve such a problem,
in general, this particular problem
has a fairly accurate solution.
But to solve such a problem,
the so-called Monte Carlo method is used.
A beautiful and loud name.
Everyone immediately imagines
James Bond sitting in Monte Carlo
and winning roulette.
Monte Carlo is a method
of numerical solving of problems
by a certain random number generator.
In Excel, in Russian-language Excel,
the function that generates random numbers
is called sultchisl.
In general, in all other programming languages
it is called rand,
from the word random, from English.
This function gives the value
evenly distributed between 0 and 1.
Why exactly from 0 to 1?
Because probability can take values
from 0 to 1.
Accordingly, the value of the function
sultchisl is distributed from 0 to 1.
But how do we use the function sultchisl
for solving a problem
to create a different distribution,
different from 0 to 1?
The so-called reverse distribution
serves these purposes.
In our case, since we believe
that sales of newspapers are distributed
normally, we will use a function
that is used in Russian-language Excel.
It is called normstobr.
It is a normal standard reverse distribution.
What will this function do?
A normal cumulative distribution
looks like this.
It increases slowly and reaches 1.
Thus, the function sultchisl,
a random number,
imagine an interval from 0 to 1,
where this function is executed.
The random number will give
the value from 0 to 1.
Accordingly, we will look for
the corresponding point on this graph
horizontally.
Then we will mark the number
of standard deviations
at which this point is located.
After generating a random number
with a corresponding distribution,
we will repeat this operation many times
and get the result
that we can already process.
In the case of a boy,
we will generate the sequence
of demands for his product
and compare what is the distribution
of orders to the highest profit.
It should be noted that
this is not a Svender model,
this is not the only task
that can be solved in this way.
Of course, the Monte Carlo method
can solve anything.
As an example, we will look
at the modeling of gambling games.
Gambling games are a very favorable
basis for using the Monte Carlo method
for one simple reason.
The uncertainty used there
is almost a pure probability.
Yes, the Monte Carlo method
lacks elegance and strictness.
Of course, sophisticated mathematicians
will never accept the results
obtained by the Monte Carlo method.
The solution to the Monte Carlo method
may require a significant computational power.
Here the so-called curse of dimensionality
begins to work.
Imagine that you are modeling
the Monte Carlo method,
for example, with the American option.
This option can be realized at any time
depending on the duration of its operation.
For example, the duration of the operation
is 90 days,
and you want to simulate
a thousand simulations every time.
You do a thousand simulations
on the first day,
and from the end of each simulation
you do a thousand simulations,
and so on.
By the 90th day,
the computational power of all existing
computers will be exhausted.
Unfortunately, yes,
sometimes this requires significant
computational power,
but fortunately not always.
Therefore, the Monte Carlo method
is desirable to have a reliable
and reproducible random number generator.
Why should the random number generator
be reproducible?
If you change something in your model,
you must understand that the result
that appeared is primarily related
to changes in the model,
and not to changes in the fact
that the model is reproducible.
This is a useful thing.
Of course, it should be said
that the random number generators
used in the Monte Carlo method
are based on simple numbers,
on a pair of two simple numbers,
and recently the calculation of random numbers
has become a serious business.
The task is simple,
or more complicated,
you come to the casino
and play such a game.
The probability of winning is 52%,
you have a large amount of money,
10 thousand dollars,
and since you know that your game
is winnable, you choose
to play it.
At the same time,
since the game is quite strange,
you play exactly a thousand times,
and your goal is to take as much money
as possible with you.
Or, if you want,
you can look at it differently.
Two different players come to the casino,
and one of them always bets 15%
of what he has in stock.
Let's see.
Here is a graph of the amount
at the disposal of a particular player.
Okay, here they are both unlucky.
Despite the fact that the game was winnable,
both of them lost.
But, let's say,
the first player,
who bets 15% of his fortune,
lost a long time ago and hopelessly.
The second player still has some money.
Now I will press the F9 button,
and so every time
a new round of 1000 games will be re-read.
Here the first player
seems to be even lucky.
The first player earned more than 90 thousand dollars,
that is, 110 thousand minus
the 10,000 he came with.
But in the end,
everything returned to its own in the circle,
and the first player went bankrupt.
While the second player fluctuated a little,
and in the end remained
with a more or less noticeable and acceptable amount.
So, no matter how many times we press the F9 button,
the player who bets the least amount
will win almost always.
Pay attention,
he is in lilac color,
here he even earned a decent amount.
And so on.
In exceptional cases,
under conditions of very high luck,
it is possible to win the first player,
but it will be extremely rare.
The situation will get even worse
if we change the probability of winning
from 52% to, say, 50.2%.
Here, in fact, it is 50.2%.
I'll just show you that it is really 50.2%.
Then we need to bet
not even 4%,
but 0.4%
so that our players
will be able to win.
And this is the most important thing.
The most important thing is
to win 0.4%
so that our money grows
as fast as possible.
Let's see.
The game is quite boring for the player,
but nevertheless,
if you pay attention,
the first player's game is very fun,
and of course,
we have some unrealistic assumptions
that the player's probability of winning
is 50.2%.
The player's probability of winning
never reaches 50%.
Of course, if the probability of winning is 49%,
it is necessary to ask
how much money
to bet on the player.
But sometimes,
in some cases,
one player will either stay at 0%
or lose a little bit.
But if you pay attention,
a player who bets 15%
will lose very quickly.
This task is solved
by Monte Carlo's method
of simulation of existing values.
Let's go back to the task
of the newspaper seller.
As I said,
the price of a newspaper purchase is $1,
the price of a newspaper sale is $2,
and the price of a newspaper sale is $3.
The price of a newspaper purchase is $1,
the price of a newspaper sale is $2,
and the price of a newspaper sale is $3.
The cost of pre-order is $1,
and the cost of over-order is $0.50.
The publisher buys a newspaper
purchased for $1 for $0.50.
The average demand for a newspaper is $100,
and the standard deviation is $20.
What are we going to do here?
We are going to simulate demand.
The distribution will be approximately normal.
The distribution will be slightly different
from the normal one,
but this is not very critical.
We will simulate demand
and we will see
how the price of a newspaper
affects the demand.
We have different boys in this line.
One boy orders 106 newspapers,
the other 108,
the third 110,
the fourth 112,
and so on.
We will see how the demand
affects the profit they get.
We will run the simulation
and leave the computer to count.
As you can see,
we have generated
a little over 1,000 different demand values.
We will build a graph
of how the level of demand
affects the profit.
Here we have several different demand levels
and the profit corresponding to them.
We will insert a graph here.
As usual, it will be a point graph.
We will use our order as x
and our profit as y.
The graph shows that the optimal demand
will be somewhere around $108-110.
The optimal demand is affected
by several conditions.
In particular,
the fact that we used
a slightly shifted distribution.
In addition, every time we generate
a new batch of data,
we will fluctuate a little
and the optimal demand will be somewhere
around $112-113.
It would seem that the difference
between the person who ordered 124
and the one who ordered 108
is not that big.
But let's think about it.
Is it a lot or a little?
The graph does not show
all possible expenses,
in particular, rent, food etc.
Imagine that the necessary expenses
are $90,000.
Thus, the person who ordered 124
gets a profit of a little less than $1,000.
While the person who ordered
108 gets a profit of almost $4,000.
This is almost 4 times higher
than the level of 124 newspapers.
It is clear that the 100 newspapers
will be located at the level of 92,000.
Nevertheless, the difference will be significant.
If we are talking about profit,
not sales,
then the difference will be significant.
Let's look at the histogram of our distribution.
It looks like a normal distribution.
Notice that the demand was several times
around zero.
Of course, we limited the demand
from below zero.
It is unlikely that someone will come
and say that the demand is too high.
Despite the fact that our average
is only around 100 newspapers,
the demand was several times
significantly higher.
Fortunately, the model of newspaper sellers
has a strict solution.
You can find it in the course application.
The point is not in a strict solution.
As a tradition,
after the course is over,
there are two tasks.
Then, after a while,
there are six tasks.
The first task was given
at the Moscow City Mathematical Olympiad
for fifth-grade students.
Two friends in the park met.
The question was how old they were.
The answer was strange.
The number of pigeons was the same
as the number of pigeons on the bench.
The man said that he was not old enough.
The second friend's son was older than him.
Then it was clear.
You need to guess
how old the second friend's son was.
There is a collection of coins.
You can count them with your eyes closed.
It is known that exactly 26 coins
are on the top of the head.
The coins should be divided into two piles
so that there is an equal number of coins
on each pile.
You cannot distinguish the head from the eagle.
You cannot distinguish the coin by touch.
Here is a hint.
All you can do with coins is to count and flip.
The first task.
A 32-kilogram cast-iron boat
floats in the pool.
The boat is thrown into the pool.
How will the water level in the pool change?
The water level in the pool will decrease.
While the boat is in the pool,
the water level in the pool will be 32 liters.
When the boat is at the bottom,
it takes only the volume of the water.
It takes about 4 liters.
The density of cast-iron is 8.
The volume of the boat is about 4 liters.
The water level in the pool is 28 liters.
The water level will decrease.
Next.
There is a cup of water on the lever scales.
You put your finger into the cup.
Of course, without separating it.
It seems that you hold the finger yourself.
However, you probably do not take into account
that the other people
push their finger into the water.
You overcome some resistance.
What happens in this case?
The cup is raised.
The cup does not know
that it has a finger in it.
The water level has risen.
The pressure has increased.
The cup honestly transfers this pressure.
The cup will weigh.
The task with the bridge.
The first thing that comes to mind
is to send the fastest one.
Let him run and wear this flashlight.
This way you will get the result in 19 minutes.
You can check.
In fact, there is a general operational principle
of the bridge.
What is it?
The principle is quite simple.
If you have two long processes,
you need to run them in parallel.
Thus, those people who go 5 and 10 minutes
should go together.
How to do this?
Of course, they cannot be let go first.
Those who pass the bridge in 1 and 2 minutes should go first.
Then 5 and 10 should go to the other side of the river.
The second of the first two should return.
And again they should go again.
Thus, we get 2 minutes there,
1 minute back,
10 minutes there,
2 minutes back,
15 minutes,
and 2 minutes forward, 17 minutes.
This is almost 10% better than the decision
that comes to mind automatically.
It seems to me that 5 minutes of thinking
is worth 10% improvement in performance.
The task with the camel.
There is another general operational principle.
I'll tell you which one.
The first one is how to solve it.
It becomes clear almost immediately
that if you load a thousand bananas on a camel
and let it go to the maximum distance,
then, of course, the camel will not reach any banana.
Moreover, it will not be able to return even back.
All this camel tuning,
self-loading, self-unloading,
the system of cargo sustainability, GPS and the desert
serve the same purpose.
The camel should be able to remove some part of the cargo from itself.
And then return to the same place,
knowing that the cargo will remain in safety.
Thus, the first step to the solution would probably be like this.
The camel takes a thousand bananas,
goes 400 kilometers,
throws 200 bananas,
returns back, takes a thousand again,
goes 400 kilometers, throws 200 bananas,
returns back, takes a thousand,
goes 400 kilometers.
Here we find that in the place where it left the bananas,
400 bananas are already lying.
And it ate 400 bananas.
It loads 400 bananas on itself,
goes the remaining 600 kilometers,
and thus it can deliver 400 bananas.
Then the question arises,
is this quantity the maximum?
Maybe we can do something
if, for example,
we change the camel's first pass.
Or maybe we can make more stops,
and then the camel will be able to deliver more.
It turns out that the general operational principle is this.
If you have the equipment,
it is desirable that it works with maximum load.
That is, we need to break our thousand kilometers
so that the camel starts with maximum load
from each new point.
If it starts with a thousand bananas
three times from the first point,
then it should start twice from the second point
with a thousand bananas.
And from the third point it should start once
If you write down the equation,
that is, to get to the first stop,
the camel should go back and forth,
back and forth, five times.
It should spend a thousand bananas for these five times.
It is easy to determine
that the distance it should cover is 200 kilometers.
Now we have 2,000 bananas left at the second point.
We need to go back and forth
and spend a thousand bananas for this time.
Of course, the distance should be 333.1 kilometers.
Thus, from the third point,
which is 200 plus 333.1,
the camel starts again with a thousand bananas.
It will eat as many bananas as it can,
but it will be able to deliver the same 533.1.
This is the optimal amount.
You can check it in other ways.
The task about two friends.
It is an interesting task.
As you have probably already seen,
there is information where it is,
and where it is not.
The information starts with the phrase
that two sons of a preschooler grow up.
We assume that a preschooler is a child
who is 7 or younger.
What happens next?
The person says that the number of pigeons
is equal to the number of pigeons
around that bench, and this is not enough.
The solution is two-dimensional.
Let's think further.
What information is there
that the elder looks like his mother?
Of course, it's not that he looks like his mother.
The information is that there is an elder.
So, before that,
when the first friend said
that he did not have enough information,
he was afraid that
these sons could be twins.
But since he was afraid that
these sons could be twins,
it greatly simplifies our decision.
We will look for an answer in advance
to the question of full squares.
Thank God, there are not so many full squares.
For some reason,
you can immediately discard such numbers
as 3, 5 and 7.
Let's discuss.
Let's say we take 49.
What are the options?
Either 1 and 49, or 7 and 70.
Let's go on.
36. What are the options?
6 and 6,
2 and 18,
3 and 12,
4 and 9.
25 is the same,
5 and 5, 1 and 25 do not work.
16.
What are the options?
1 and 16, 2 and 8, 4 and 4.
4 and 4, since there is an elder,
2 and 8, 8 is an underage.
The same thing happens with 3 and 3,
or 1 and 9.
9 is no underage.
1 and 1, there is only one option left,
that they are twins and they are one year old.
2 and 2 are not working,
so the second son is 1 and 4 years old.
Another question about coins.
It's a funny question.
It's quite simple.
Pay attention.
The condition of the question says
that the coins should be divided into two piles
so that there are the same number of coins
and the other pile should be the same.
So, you can use the logic
that a double negation is the same as a positive.
Or, to put it simply,
a minus to a minus gives a plus.
You count 26 coins.
Let's say, among them
you got a K-coin with a top.
Then how many coins are left in the second pile?
26 minus K.
Now, you flip the 26 coins
with K-coins and a top.
Now, in this pile
there are 26 minus K coins.
The K-coins with a top
are now in the top.
The coins with a minus K
And the 26 minus K coins are left in the left pile.
Thus, we got the same number of K-coins.
There are many such interesting tasks.
We need to solve them
to make our brain work.
It's very useful to solve them.
Thank you.
The course is over.
I'd like to draw your attention
to statistics.
Statistics is not a recurring thing.
But statistics often allows us
to get more or less certain predictions.
If not predictions,
then preliminary results.
Let's call it so.
Because it's not possible to predict
anything in general.
Preliminary results will help you
to cope better with your business.
Of course, such things as linear programming
and Monte Carlo method
are also very useful.
But I'd like to draw your attention
to statistics.
Of course, the question of statistics
is very complicated.
But we have no other choice
than to believe
that the conditions
that existed in the past
will be repeated in the future.
Study statistics and its application in business.
Good luck to everyone!